#Introduction
version 1.2.1

The policy sciences emerged around the middle of the past century, built on the idea that social problems were amenable to scientifically informed, rationally derived, government led solutions that could be free of the ambiguities and paradoxes of politics (Lasswell, 1951). A mark of pride of the modern, rational, professionally goverened state (Simon, 1976) was that objective advice based on evidence, analysis and expertise could usefully inform a decision maker’s thinking, and that “good” policy analysis was a key foundation for “good” policy decisions (Quade, 1975). Like the related fields of political science, public administration, law and economics, the public policy aims of these social sciences share a common mission: to inform public policy deliberation using analysis of evidence based on scientific methods, presented as rational argumentation (Stone, 2012). 

Policy informatics is an emerging discipline that draws upon this rationalist policy sciences traditional and combines it with system sciences (von Bertalanffy, 1968; Weiner, 1948) in an interdisciplinary exploration of how advances in information and communications technologies (ICTs) can strengthen and broaden the policy sciences approach, improving decision support while increasing the range of voices accommodated within the discussion. Policy informatics is not a technocratic or purely computational approach to policy analysis (at least not in the way we define it here); the use of ICTs as facilitators of deliberation and collaboration are as much part of the policy informatics approach as are the use of ICT-based techniques such as agent-based modelling, big data analytics and simulation (Johnston and Kim, 2012). In this way, policy informatics accommodates the post-positivist turn in policy analysis (Fischer, 1998) while being grounded in Lasswell's vision of the policy sciences as a joining of scientific analysis with democratic studies (deLeon, 1997).

However, at the core of the policy sciences approach - and, by extension, policy informatics - are several premises, including that the objective of evidence-based analysis should be to better inform deliberation and decision making, that better-informed decisions are preferred to less-informed decisions and that objective facts are both attainable and a necessary foundation for rational discourse. Whether the application of ICTs is emphasized or not, both approaches - policy sciences and policy informatics - share a belief that more information is preferred to less, that rationality is preferred to irrationality, that evidence is preferred to belief and objective analysis can provide clarity in uncertain situations.

Our concern here is with what role policy informatics can play in an environment where those premises appear not to be valid. What if the core assumptions underlying policy informatics are untrue, because values and beliefs weigh so heavily on interpretation that they alter receptivity to information and ultimate guide decision-making?  

In the fall of 2013, we began to notice increasing Internet chatter highlighting research suggesting that a person’s ability to solve a mathematical problem is affected by their beliefs. In most instances 2 + 2 = 4. But if the answer 4 conflicts with your beliefs or preferences, an answer that aligned more closely to your beliefs will be more persuasive. And then, it gets worse: telling you that the answer is 4 - an answer at odds with your strongly held belief - may only cause you to more strongly hold onto your insistence that the answer is actually 30. Or -5. Or the methods that produced 4 are suspect. Or that the premise of the question is flawed. 

Added to this specific finding are general observations about the state of deliberation and policy making in our democracies: debates about the very existence of human-caused climate change forestall debates about how to best address the problem; epidemiological and drug-trial evidence are questioned by activist parents who point towards possible government and drug company conspiracies as reasons to avoid common childhood vaccinations; whether Social Security is sustainable over the long-term, whether wealth inequality is increasing or gender pay-differences exist depends on which model you believe. 

Such deeply troubling findings and observations cause us to ask: how can we have rationale governance when we can’t rely on evidence to frame our discussions? Moreover, how can we hope to facilitate informed decisions and actions when ideological beliefs trump scientific facts? 

This article is an investigation of this challenge. 

(needs article overview)
