#Literature Review
version 0.1.1

##Observations of phenomenon

Starting first with "[Scientists’ depressing new discovery about the brain](http://www.salon.com/2013/09/17/the_most_depressing_discovery_about_the_brain_ever_partner/)" (Marty Kaplan writing in Salon), which is really a shorter form of "[Science confirms: Politics wrecks your ability to do math](http://grist.org/politics/science-confirms-politics-wrecks-your-ability-to-do-math/)" (Chris Mooney, Grist), both are essentially reporting on recent research that shows that highly numerate people with strong political convictions fail a mathematical challenge when the correct answer to the math problem contradicted their political beliefs. This finding was even more likely when the subject was good at math and when their political beliefs were strongly entrenched.

Before going much further, we should probably look at the original research that’s in a draft working paper called "[Motivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self-Government](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2319992)" (Dan Kahan, Ellen Peters, Erica Cantrell Dawson and Paul Slovic, who hold affiliations with Yale, Harvard, Ohio State, Oregon, and Cornell - reasonably reputable institutions). This paper compares two explanations for how people’s beliefs can deviate from the evidence: the “Science Comprehension Thesis” (SCT), where persistent controversy over policy-relevant facts are attributed to deficits in the public’s capacity to understand scientific evidence; and the “Identity-protective Cognition Thesis” (ICT), where the public’s capacity to interpret decision-relevant science is disabled by cultural and political conflict. Political "polarization did not abate among subjects highest in Numeracy; instead, it increased. This outcome supported ICT, which predicted that more Numerate subjects would use their quantitative-reasoning capacity selectively to conform their interpretation of the data to the result most consistent with their political outlook.” In short, believing causes seeing. &nbsp;

(It’s interesting to note that Kahan et al. have become embroiled in [political controversy](http://news.sciencemag.org/brain-behavior/2013/10/statistical-fluke-researchers-observations-tea-party-and-science-spark) over the controversial politics of their findings. It seems that people tend to support their findings when they agree with them, and otherwise pillory them when the results are less than complementary).
