#What's an Honest Policy Informatician To Do?

The topic of this [article](https://github.com/ASU-CPI/honest-pi/blob/master/article.md) is the relationship between evidence and beliefs in public policy discussions. 

But this is also an experiment in collaborative group writing. We are inviting anyone to help us write and improve this article by joining us on [GitHub](https://github.com/ASU-CPI/honest-pi). Rather than deciding beforehand who the list of authors will be and then working together to write the article - by emailing, for example, subsequent versions of Word documents with track changes enabled to each other - we are opening this writing process to anyone interested. 

We fully anticipate that persuading colleagues to participate in this experiment will not be easy; but we believe that there is enormous potential in this approach. Above all, however, this is truly an experiment - we don't know what will happen. Will the group fragment and fail to meet its objective? Will conflicts be unresolvable? Will authorship become too contentious to determine? Can traditional academic incentives attached to authorship be accommodated within GitHub? Will anyone contribute? Will too many show up?

Needless to say - well, maybe we should make this explicit - this experiment can be freely forked by anyone to write a different article, or for a different collaborative process, using the framework we set out here or modified to how you see fit. Perhaps you can think of better rules, or a more interesting topic (though we doubt it), or you think you can write a better version of this article than us and get it published first. As Abby Hoffman wrote: "Fork this Repo!" If you do fork it for another, similar, collaborative writing purpose, we would simply encourage you to join us in the second stage of this experiment: i.e., [analyzing and writing up the results](https://github.com/ASU-CPI/github-experiment). 
