###Rules for Participating 

- participation is open to any interested person with the technical means to connect to and edit the repository.
- contributions must be made through GitHub. Contributors must have their own GitHub account. If you want to be credited for authorship, you will want to use your real name (or be prepared to reveal your real name should the article be accepted for publication). 
- contributors warrant that any contribution is their original work. By contributing, you agree that copyright for your contribution is being turned over to the project and will be subject to the project's [licensing](https://github.com/ASU-CPI/honest-pi/blob/master/licensing.md). The project does not use a formal Contributor License Agreement (CLA) except as described in these rules.
- anyone who makes a contribution (regardless of magnitude or perceived importance) automatically becomes a member of the group (these are listed as contributors in GitHub; contributors cannot access the repository directly). A member may choose to resign their membership at any time. Membership can be revoked using the consensus decision making process of the group.
- a limited subset of contributors will have enhanced administrator rights beyond those of contributors (these are called collaborators in GitHub; collaborators are responsible for managing significant changes, reviewing submissions from contributors and committers, approving or denying pull requests, and managing the project subject to the [consensus rules](http://consensusdecisionmaking.org/Articles/Basics%20of%20Consensus%20Decision%20Making.html)). This is to ensure that a number of group members can perform functions such as merging pull requests on behalf of the group (collaborators cannot act without the consent of the group). Collaborators initially will be members of the [Arizona State University](http://www.asu.edu) [Center for Policy Informatics](http://cpi.asu.edu), but subsequent collaborators will be added based on the wishes of the group.
- members of the group "own" an equal share of the repository regardless of when they join or the magnitude or significance of their contribution. Note, however, that the entire repository is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en_US), so ownership conveys very little benefit to any individual member.
- the group has the ability to decide what constitutes authorship (e.g., contributions above a certain threshold). This decision must be made by consensus.
- order of authorship (or some other means of identifying relative contributions) will be determined by the group members (using a process to be determined).
- group decisions, including changing any of the "rules of the game", will be made by the members of the group using [principles of consensus decision-making](http://consensusdecisionmaking.org/Articles/Basics%20of%20Consensus%20Decision%20Making.html). 
